---
date:   2014-04-02 23:03:20
title:  Haddock 2.14.2
author: Fūzetsu
---

This is just a quick follow-up to my previous post. We have now
released Haddock 2.14.2 which contains few minor changes. The reason
for this release is to get a few quick patches in. No fancy overview
today, just quick mentions. Here is the relevant part of the
changelog:

Changes in version 2.14.2

 * Always drop --split-objs GHC flag for performance reasons [(#292)][292]

 * Print kind signatures GADTs [(#85)][85]

 * Drop single leading whitespace when reasonable from @-style blocks [(#201)][201]

 * Fix crashes associated with exporting data family record selectors [(#294)][294]

[#201][201] was the the annoying aesthetics bug I mentioned last time and
that is now fixed.

[#294][294] was a bug we're glad to have gotten rid of
now: it was only reported recently but I imagine more and more
projects would have start to hit it.

[#292][292] should improve
performance considerably in some special cases, such as when Template
Haskell is being used.

[#85][85] was just a quick resolution of years old ticket, I think
you'll find it useful.

I predict that this is the version that will ship with GHC 7.8.1 and I
don't think we'll have any more 2.14.x releases.

Ideally I'd like to get well under 100 open tickets for the next
release (there are currently 117 open).

Some things I will be concentrating on next is splitting up Haddock
into a few packages and working on the Hoogle back-end. The Hoogle
back-end is incredibly broken which is a shame considering Hoogle is a
very useful service. We want to make the maintainers life easier.

Splitting up Haddock into a few packages will be of great advantage to
people wishing to use (parts of) Haddock as a library without
adding a dependency on a specific version of GHC to their program. It
should also become much easier to implement and maintain your own
back-ends.

If you are interested in helping out with Haddock, we'd love to have
you. Pop into #haddock on Freenode, make some noise and wait for
someone to respond. Alternatively, [contact me][contact] through
other means.

PS: While I realise that some of my posts make it on reddit, I myself
do not use it. You're welcome to discuss these but if you leave
questions or messages to me on reddit, I will almost certainly not see
them. If you want my attention, please either use e-mail or IRC. Thanks!

[201]: http://trac.haskell.org/haddock/ticket/201
[294]: http://trac.haskell.org/haddock/ticket/294
[292]: http://trac.haskell.org/haddock/ticket/292
[85]: http://trac.haskell.org/haddock/ticket/85
[contact]: /contact.html
